CHAPTER 6
Motherboards
In this chapter, you will learn how to
- Explain how motherboards work
- Recognize modern expansion buses
- Upgrade and install motherboards
- Troubleshoot motherboard problems
The motherboard provides the foundation for the personal computer. Every piece of hardware, from the CPU to the lowliest expansion card, directly or indirectly plugs into the motherboard. The motherboard contains the wires--called traces--that make up the buses of the system. It holds the vast majority of the ports used by the peripherals, and it distributes the power from the power supply. Without the motherboard, you literally have no PC.
This chapter starts with an explanation of how motherboards work, identifying various types of form factors of motherboards, including distinguishing features. The second section examines expansion capabilities on motherboards, specifically the types of expansion slots you'll run into in the wild and how to install expansion cards. The third section goes through the pragmatic steps of upgrading and installing motherboards. The chapter finishes with techniques for troubleshooting motherboard problems.
Layers of the PCB
Modern motherboards are layered printed circuit boards (PCBs), copper etched onto a nonconductive material and then coated with some sort of epoxy for strength. The layers mask some of their complexity. You can see some of the traces on the board, but every motherboard is four or more layers thick. The layers contain a veritable of wires, carrying data and commands back and forth between the CPU, RAM, and peripherals. The layered structure enables multiple wires to send data without their signals intefering with each other. The layered approach allows the manufacturer to add complexity and additional components to the board without extending the overall length and width of the board. Shorter traces also allow signals to travel faster than they would if the wires were longer, as would be necessary if motherboards did not use layers. The multiple layers also add strength to the board itself, so it doesn't bend easily.
*Historical/Conceptual*
How Motherboards Work
Three variable and interrelated characteristics define modern motherboards: form factor, chipset, and components. The form factor determines the physical size of the motherboard as well as the general location of components and ports. The chipset defines the type of processor and RAM the motherboard requires and determines to a degree the built-in devices the motherboard supports, including the expansion slots. Finally, the built-in components determine the core functionality of the system.
Almost all chipsets used in desktops and laptops are made by either Intel or AMD. It's fitting that the two biggest CPU manufacturers for Windows-, MacOS-, and Linux-based computers would also produce the essential supporting chipsets.
Any good tech should be able to make a recommendation to a client about a particular motherboard simply by perusing the specs. Because the motherboard determines function, expansion, and stability for the whole PC, it's essential that you know your motherboards!
EXAM TIP
CompTIA A+ 1001 exam objective 3.5 focuses specifically on motherboards you find in classical Windows- and Linux-based desktop PCs. This style of motherboard enables techs to do things such as update components. Thus this chapter uses the term "PC" pretty much throughout.
Form Factors
Motherboard form factors are industry-standardized shapes and layouts that enable motherboards to work with cases and power supplies. A single form factor applies to all three components. All motherboards come in a basic rectangular or square shape but vary in overall size and in the layout of built-in components. You need to install a motherboard in a case designed to fit it, so the ports and slot openings on the back fit correctly.
The power supply and the motherboard need matching connectors, and different form factors define different connections. Given that the term "form factor" applies to the case, motherboards, and power supply--the three parts of the PC most responsible for moving air around inside the PC--the form factor also defines how the air moves around in the case.
To perform motherboard updates and provide knowledgeable recommendations to clines, techs need to know their form factors. The PC industry has adopted--and dropped--a number of form factors over the years with such names as AT, ATX, and ITX. Let's start with the granddaddy of all PC form factors, AT.
NOTE
In case your curiosity has run rampant, yes, the form factor initials stand for words. AT was Advanced Technology, ATX stands for Advanced Technology Extended; and ITX stands for Information Technology Extended. No one used or uses the full terms. Stick with the initials.
AT Form Factor
The AT form factor, invented by IBM in the early 1980s, was the predominant form factor of motherboards through the mid-1990s. AT is now obsolete.
The AT motherboard had a few size variations, ranging from large to very large. The original AT motherboard was huge, around 12 inches wide by 13 inches deep. PC technology was new and needed lots of space for the various chips necessary to run the components of the PC.
The single greatest problem with AT motherboards was the lack of external ports. When PCs were first invented, the only devices plugged into the average PC were a monitor and a keyboard. That's what the AT was designed to handle--the only dedicated connector on an AT motherboard was the keyboard port.
Over the years, the number of devices plugged into the back of the PC has grown tremendously. Your average PC today has keyboard, a mouse, a printer, some speakers, a monitor, and--if your system's like mine--four to six USB devices connected to it at any given time. These added components created a demand for a new type of form factor, one with more dedicated connectors for more devices. Many attempts were made to create a new standard form factor. Invariably, these new form factors integrated dedicated connectors for at least the mouse and printer, and many even added connectors for video, sound, and phone lines.
*1001*
ATX Form Factor
There continued to be a tremendous demand for a new for factor, one that had more standard connectors and also was flexible enough for possible changes in technology. This demand led to the creation of the ATX form factor in 1995. ATX got off to a slow start, but by around 1998, ATX overtook AT to become the most common form factor, a distinction it holds over 20 years later.
ATX is distinct from AT in the lack of an AT keyboard port, replaced with a rear panel that has all necessary ports built in. In an early ATX motherboard, you could see the mini-DIN (PS/2) keyboard and mouse ports at the left, standard features on some ATX boards.
The ATX form factors includes many improvements over the AT. The position of the power supply creates better air movement. The CPU and RAM are placed to provide easier access, and the rearrangement of components prevents long expansion cards from colliding with the CPU or northbridge. Other improvements, such as placing the RAM closer to the northbridge and CPU than on AT boards, offer users enhanced performance as well. The shorter the wires, the easier to shield them and make them capable of handling double or quadruple the clock speed of the motherboard. There are obvious differences in the placement of internal connections between AT and ATX motherboards.
ATX motherboards come ine three variations to accommodate different types of cases. So far, you've seen the full-sized ATX form factor, which is 12 by 9.6 inches.
The microATX motherboard floats in at a svelte 9.6 by 9.6 inches (usually), or about 30 percent smaller than standard ATX, yet uses the standard ATX connections. A microATX motherboard fits into a standard ATX case on in the much smaller microATX cases. Note that not all microATX motherboards have the same physical sizes. You'll sometimes see microATX motherboards referred to with the Greeek symbol for micro, as in μATX.