https://www.netcamp.in/application/assets/img/CCNA-Exam-Prep-Guide.pdf
[89 / 864] - [99 / 864]

chapter two physical layer networking concepts
objectives
this chapter covers the following Cisco-specified objective for the "Planning and Designing" section of the CCNA exam:
Design a simple LAN using Cisco technology
Various network designs or layouts are commonly used to setup a LAN. To pass the CCNA exam, you need to familiarize yourself with four prevalent network topologies. Chapter 5, "Introduction to Cisco Routers and Switches, "reviews specific Cisco devices that can be used as part of new LAN network implementation.
Outline
Introduction
Network Topologies
The Bus Topology
The Ring Topology
The Star Topology
The Mesh Topology
Cabling
Coaxial Cable
Twisted-Pair Cable
Straight-Through Cable
Cross-Over Cable
Rolled Cable
Fiber-Optic Cable
Wireless
Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi)
Infrared
Bluetooth
Physical Layer Devices
Repeaters
Hubs
Network Interfaces
Chapter Summary
Apply Your Knowledge
Study Strategies
Identify the four physical network topologies discussed in this chapter.
Know the different types of network cables and the characteristics that differentiate them from one another.
Review the wireless technology standards.
Be able to identify devices that are used at the Physical layer.
Introduction
Chapter 1, "Standard Internetworking Models," went over the layers of the OSI and TCP/IP models. This chapter goes into more detail regarding the Physical layer. Remember that electrical, mechanical, prodecural, and functional requirements are defined at this layer. Such requirements provide assistance with the activation, maintenance, and deactivation of physical connectivity between devices.
Concepts covered include the topologies, cabling, and devices that are relevant at the physical level and important to understand when studying for the CCNA exam. Also, because wireless communications are constantly evolving and are flourishing in today's marketplace, severla significant wireless technologies are covered as well.
Network topologies
Objective:
Design a simple LAN, using Cisco technology
Topology can be defined as either the physical or logical layout of a network. Typically, a physical topology is documented with a network diagram, such as Visio diagram. Diagrams can prove to be extremely helpful when troubleshooting a network issue. Most companies keep a database with copies of their entire network as well as individual site connections. If you work in a sales capacity, diagrams are drawn up to plan out the network setup and to ensure that all bases are covered to meet customer expectations.
Just as you might imagine, a physical topology consists of the cables, workstations, and other peripheral devices that comprise the network. A logical topology refers to how the network actually communicates. This may differ from the physical topology; therefore, this section covers the four most common physical network topologies and what the associated logical network topology is for the physical star network.
The Bus Topology
A bus network topology may also be referred to as linear bus topology. This topology is set up so that the network nodes are connected via a single cable (also referred to as trunk or a backbone). Electrical signals are sent from one end of the cable to the other. When this occurs, all connected devices receive that electrical signal transmission. Network devices are connected directly to the trunk with a T connector. Both ends of the trunk use a terminator to stop the electrical signal from echoing back down the cable.
Because the bus topology use a single cable, it is low-cost option that is easily implemented. The downside of this setup is the lack of redundancy. If the cable breaks, the entire network goes down.
The Ring Topology
A ring network topology is set up so that one device is directly connected to two other devices on the same network. When a device emits a data signal transmission, the transmission is sent in a single direction to the next connected device. The transmission continues to pass along each device successively until it arrives back at the original transmitting device. This method creates a ring or a loop.
With this topology, a single ring configuration lacks a failover solution. If there is a break anywhere on the ring, it brings down the entire network. This was the same situation with the bus network topology. For this reason, you may also configure a dual ring topology. If there is a failure on one physical ring, the other physical ring passes data transmissions to ensure network operability.
The Star Topology
The star network topology is the most commonly implemented network design. With this topology, there is a central device with separate connections to each end node. Each connection uses a separate cable, which adds to the cost of implementation. When hubs are used in a star topology, a logical bus is created. This type of network star is called a hub-and-spoke topology.
NOTE
Although the star topology is a physical star, it also can be referred to as a logical bus topology because hubs are used to control communication.
Because there are separate connections between end nodes and the central device, this topology enables the network administrator to add or remove end nodes without affecting service to all other nodes on that network. This is also possible with the token ring topology, which enables you to add multi-station access units (MAUs) to the network without disrupting service. The same cannot be said for the physical bus network topologies.
The Mesh Topology
The full mesh network topology is set up so that each device is directly connected to every other device on the network. This connection method has built-in redundancy. If one link goes down, the device transmits via another link.
A partial mesh network topology has direct connectivity between some of the network devices, but not all of them, as the full mesh topology does.
Overall, mesh topologies are much more expensive to implement. However, the cost may be acceptable given the reliability of this design.
Cabling
This section reviews the types of media or cable that are used for LAN connectivity. The primary media types include coaxial, twisted-pair, and fiber-optic cables. Cable media offer physical connectivity to network devices. Cables may consist of metal, glass or plastic. Copper is the most popular metal cable. Fiber-optic uses glass or plastic cabling.
Before you look at each medium in greater detail, it's good idea to discuss several important terms related to data transmission that are directly affected by what type of cable media is used on a network.
Review the following terminology:
Bandwidth--The total amount of information that can traverse a communications medium, measured in bits per second. Measurement of bandwidth is helpful for network performance analysis. Also, availability is increasing but limited
EXAM ALERT
For the exam, remember that bandwidth is used to analyze network performance and that although availability is increasing, it is also limited.
Attenuation--Occurs over long distances as a signal loses strength.
Electromagnetic Interference (EMI)--Interference or noise caused by electromagnetic signals, which can decrease data integrity.
Crosstalk--An electrical or magnetic field originating from one communications signal that can affect the signal in a nearby circuit.
Near-end Crosstalk (NEXT)--Crosstalk measured at the transmitting end of a cable.
Far-end Crosstalk (FEXT)--Crosstalk measured at the far end of the cable from where the transmission was sent.
EXAM ALERT
Know the terms NEXT and FEXT and what they represent for the CCNA exam.
Coaxial Cable
Coaxial cables for data consist of a single copper wire surrounded by a plastic insulation cover and a braided copper shield. Primarily, two types of coaxial cables are used in conjunction with Ethernet LAN networks. They are called thin and thick coax.
Thin coax has the following characteristics:
Also called thinnet
.25 inches in diameter
Maximum cable length = 185 meters
Uses Bayonet Neill Concelman connectors (BNCs)
10BASE-2 ethernet standard
NOTE
The Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) ethernet standards are reviewed in Chapter 3, "Data Link Networking Concepts."
Thick coax has the following characteristics:
Also called thicknet
Maximum cable length = 500 meters
Uses vampire taps (where the tap goes through the shield to touch the copper wire)
Uses attachment unit interface (AUI) adapters
10BASE-5 ethernet standard
The coaxial cable media is not nearly as popular as twisted pair or fiber optic. It is not as flexible or cost-effective as other options. You may see this cable implemented on an older network.
Twisted-Pair Cable
Just as the name indicates, twisted-pair cables twist two wires together to form a pair. This solution helps to reduce interference and attenuation. There are two types of twisted-pair cabling defined by the Telecommunications Information Association (TIA). Those types are unshielded twisted pair (UTP) and shielded twisted pair (STP). UTP is the more common and cost-effective solution. STP has an additional shield, which provides additional reduction of interference and attenuation, but also makes it the more expensive solution. For the exam, UTP is reviewed in greater detail.
UTP key characteristics include the following:
Eight color-coded wires
Four pairs
Use an RJ-45 connector
Vulnerable to EMI
Maximum, practical length is 100 meters
10Base-T, 100BaseT, and 1000BaseT ethernet standards
TIP
When reviewing for the exam, note that UTP is vulnerable to EMI and uses an RJ-4 connector.
EXAM ALERT
Because attenuation causes a signal to lose strength as the length of a cable increases, the maximum, practical length of a UTP cable is 100 meters.
UTP can be broken down into six more categories. You my have heard someone talk about a Cat5 cable. They are referring to a Category 5 UTP cable. Each category has different characteristics:
Category 1--Telephone cable that is not used for data transmission.
Category 2--Data cable that can handle speeds up to 4 Mbps. This is no longer fast enough for networks today.
Category 3--Data cable that can handle speeds up to 10 Mbps. It is faster than the Cat2 cable, and this was quite popular until network speeds surpassed the 10Mbps threshold.
Category 4--Data cable that can handle speeds up to 16 Mbps. Meant to be used with token ring.
Category 5--Data cable that can handle speeds up to 100 Mbps. This is currently the most popular cable selection.
Category 5e--Data cable that can handle speeds up to 1 Gbps. This is a popular choice for Gigabit Ethernet networks.
Category 6--This cable was created to exceed speeds of 1 Gbps.
It is also important to know the pinouts for twisted-pair cables. The term pinout is used in the electronic industry to describe the purpose of each pin in a connector. When choosing your cable, you need to know which pinout is appropriate to connect the devices on your network. The following sections cover the straight-through and cross-over cables.
Straight-Through Cable
Straight-through cables use four wires and pins 1, 2, 3, and 6. Given those pins, pin 1 is connected on one end of the cable to pin 1 on the opposite end of the cable. Pin 2 at one end is connected to pin 2 on the far end, and so on.
These cables are meant only for interface to interface connections on ethernet networks, so you cannot use them with token ring, ISDN, and so on.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISDN

Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) is a set of communication standards for simultaneous digital transmission of voice, video, data, and other network services over the digitalized circuits of the public switched telephone network. Work on the standard began in 1980 at Bell Labs and was formally standardized in 1988 in the CCITT "Red Book". By the time the standard was released, newer networking systems with much greater speeds were available, and ISDN saw relatively little uptake in the wider market. One estimate suggests ISDN use peaked at a worldwide total of 25 million subscribers at a time when 1.3 billion analog lines were in use. ISDN has largely been replaced with digital subscriber line (DSL) systems of much higher performance.
Prior to ISDN, the telephone system consisted of digital links like T1/E1 on the long-distance lines between telephone company offices and analog signals on copper telephone wires to the customers, the "last mile". At the time, the network was viewed as a way to transport voice, with some special services available for data using additional equipment like moderns or by providing a T1 on the customer's location. What became ISDN started as an effort to digitalize the last mile, originally under the name "Public Switched Digital Capacity" (PSDC). This would allow call routing to be completed in an all-digital system, while also offering a separate data line. The Basic Rate Interface, or BRI, is the standard last-mile connection in the ISDN system, offering two 64 kbit/s "bearer" lines and a single 16 kbit/s "data" channel for commands and data.
Although ISDN was successful in a few countries such as Germany, on a global scale the system was largely ignored and garnered the industry nickname "innovation(s) subscribers didn't need." It found a use for a time for small-office digital connection, using the voice lines for data at 64 kbit/s, sometimes "bounded" to 128 kbit/s, but the introduction of 56 kbit/s modems undercut its value in many roles. It also found use in videoconference systems, where the direct end-to-end connection was desirable. The H.320 standard was designed around its 64 kbit/s data rate. The underlying ISDN concepts found wider use as a replacement for the T1/E1 lines it was originally intended to extend, roughly doubling the performance of those lines.
History Digital lines
Since its introduction in 1881, the twisted pair copper line has been installed for telephone use worldwide, with well over a billion individual connections installed by the year 2000. Over the first half of the 20th century, the connection of these lines to form calls was increasingly automated, culminating in the crossbar switches that had largely replaced earlier concepts by the 1950s.
As telephone use surged in the post-WWII era, the problem of connecting the massive number of lines became an area of significant study. Bell Lab's seminal work on digital encoding of voice led to the use of 64 kbit/s as a standard for voice lines (or 56 kbit/s in some systems). In 1962, Robert Aaron of Bell introduced the T1 system, which carried 1.544 Mbit/s of data on a pair of twisted pair lines over a distance of about one mile. This was used in the Bell network to carry traffic between local switch offices, with 24 voice lines at 64 kbit/s and a separate 8 kbit/s line for signaling commands like connecting or hanging up a call. This could be extended over long distances using repeaters in the lines. T1 used a very simple encoding scheme, alternate mark inversion (AMI), which reached only a few percent of the theoretical capacity of the line but was appropriate for 1960s electronics.
By the late 1970s, T1 lines and their faster counterparts, along with all-digital switching systems, had replaced the earlier analog systems for most of the western world, leaving only the customer's equipment and their local end office using analog systems for most of the western world, leaving only the customer's equipment and their local end office using analog systems. Digitizing this "last mile" was increasingly seen as the next problem that needed to be solved. However, these connections now represented over 99% of the total telephony network, as the upstream links had increasingly been aggregated into a smaller number of much higher performance systems, especially after the introduction of fiber optic lines. If the system was to become all-digital, a new standard would be needed that was appropriate for the existing customer lines, which might be miles long and of widely varying quality.
Standardization
Around 1978, Ralph Wyndrum, Barry Bossick and Joe Lechleider of Bell Labs began one such effort to develop a last-mile solution. They studied a number of derivatives of the T1's AMI concept and concluded that a customer-side line could reliably carry about 160 kbit/s of data over a distance of 4 to 5 miles (6.4 to 8.0 km). That would be enough to carry two voice-quality lines at 64 kbit/s as well as separate 16 kbit/s line for data. At the time, modems that were normally 300 bit/s and 1200 bit/s would not become common until the early 1980s and the 2400 bit/s standard would not be completed until 1984. In this market, 16 kbit/s represented a significant advance in performance in addition to being a separate channel that coexists with voice channels.
A key problem was that the customer might only have a single twisted pair line to the location of the handset, so the solution used in T1 with separate upstream and downstream connections was not universally available. With analog connections, the solution was to use echo cancellation, but at the much higher bandwidth of the new concept, this would not be so simple. A debate broke out between teams worldwide about the best solution to this problem; some promoted newer versions of echo cancellation, while others preferred the "ping pong" concept where the direction of data would rapidly switch the line from send to receive at such a high rate it would not be noticeable to the user. John Cioffi had recently demonstrated echo cancellation would work at these speeds, and further suggested that they should consider moving directly to 1.5 Mbit/s performance using this concept. The suggestion was literally laughed off the table and his boss told him to "sit down and shut up." But the echo cancellation concept that was taken up by Joe Lechleider eventually came to win the debate.
Meanwhile, the debate over the encoding scheme itself was also ongoing. As the new standard was to be international, this was even more contentious as several regional digital standards had emerged in the 1960s and 70s and merging them was not going to be easy. To further confuse issues, in 1984 the Bell System was broken up and the US center for development moved to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) T1D1.3 committee. Thomas Starr of the newly formed Ameritech led this effort and eventually convinced the ANSI group  to select the 2B1Q standard proposed by Peter Adams of British Telecom. This standard used an 80 kHz base frequency and encoded two bits per baud to produce the 160 kbit/s base rate. Ultimately Japan selected a different standard, and Germany selected one with three levels instead of four, but all of those could interchange with the ANSI standard.
From an economic perspective, the European Commission sought to liberalize and regulate ISDN across the European Economic Community. The Council of the European Communities adopted Council Recomendation 86/659/EEC in December 1986 for its coordinated introduction within the framework of CEPT. ETSI (the European Telecommunications Standards Institute) was created by CEPT in 1988 and would develop the framework.
Rollout
With digital-quality voice made possible by ISDN, offering two separate lines and continuous data connectivity, there was an initial global expectation of high customer demand for such systems in both the home and office environments. This expectation was met with varying degrees of success across different regions.
In the United States, many changes in the market led to the introduction of ISDN being tepid. During the lengthy standardization process, new concepts rendered the system largely superfluous. In the office, multi-line digital switches like the Meridian Norstar took over telephone lines while local area networks like Ethernet provided performance around 10 Mbit/s which had become the baseline for inter-computer connections in offices. ISDN offered no real advantages in the voice role and was far from competitive in data. Additionally, modems had continued improving, introducing 9600 bit/s systems in the late 1980s and 14.4 kbit/s in 1991, which significantly eroded ISDN's value proposition for the home customer.
Conversely, in Europe, ISDN found fertile ground for deployment, driven by regulatory support, infrastructural needs, and the absence of comparable high-speed communication technologies at the time. The technology was widely embraced for its ability to digitalize the "last mile" of telecommunications, significantly enhancing the quality and efficiency of voice, data, and video transmission over traditional analog systems.
Meanwhile, Lechleider had proposed using ISDN's echo cancellation and 2B1Q encoding on existing T1 connections so that the distance between repeaters could be doubled to about 2 miels (3.2 km). Another standards war broke out, but in 1991 Lechleider's 1.6 Mbit/s "High-Speed Digital Subscriber Line" eventually won this process as well, after Starr drove it through the ANSI T1E1.4 group. A similar standard emerged in Europe to replace their E1 lines, increasing the sampling range from 80 to 100 kHz to achieve 2.048 Mbit/s. By the mid-1990s, these Primary Rate Interface (PRI) lines had largely replaced T1 and E1 between telephone company offices.
Replacement by ADSL
Lechleider also believed this higher-speed standard would be much more attractive to customers than ISDN had proven. Unfortunately, as these speeds, the systems suffered from a type of crosstalk known as "NEXT", for "near-end crosstalk". This made longer connections on customer lines difficult. Lechleider noted that NEXT only occurred when similar frequencies were being used, and could be diminished if one of the directions used a different carrier rate, but doing so would reduce the potential bandwidth of that channel. Lechleider suggested that most consumer use would be asymmetric anyway, and that providing a high-speed channel towards the user and a lower speed return would be suitable for many uses.
This work in the early 1990s eventually led to the ADSL concept, which emerged in 1995. An early supporter of the concepot was Alcate, who jumped on ADSL while many other companies were still devoted to ISDN. Krish Prabu, COO of Alcatel, stated that "Alcatel will have to invest one billion dollars in ADSL before it makes a profit, but it is worth it." They introduced the first DSL Access Multiplexers (DSLAM), the large-modem systems used at the telephony offices, and later introduced customer ADSL modems under the Thomson brand. Alcatel remained the primary vendor of ADSL systems for well over a decade.
ADSL quickly replaced ISDN as the customer-facing solution for last-mile connectivity. ISDN has largely disappeared