Troubleshooting RAM
"Memory" errors show up in a variety of ways on modern systems, including system lockups, page faults, and other error screens. These errors can indicate bad RAM but often point to something completely unrelated. This is especially true with intermittent problems. Techs need to recognize these errors and determine which part of the system caused the memory error. Then they need to follow up with various testing methods.
System lockups and page faults (they often go hand in hand) in Windows can indicate a problem with a RAM. A system lockup is when the computer stops functioning. A page fault is a milder error that can be caused by memory issues but not necessarily system RAM problems. Certainly page faults look like RAM issues because Windows generates frightening error messages filled with long strings of hexadecimal digits, such as "KRNL386 caused a page fault at 03F2:25A003BC". Just because the error message contains a memory address, however, does not mean that you have a problem with your RAM. Write down the address. If it repeats in later error messages, you probably have a bad RAM sticks. If windows displays different memory locations, you need to look elsewhere for the culprit.
Every once in a while, something potentially catastrophic happens within the PC, some little electron hits the big red panic button, and the operating system has to shut down certain functions before it can save data. This panic button inside the PC is called a non-maskable interrupt (NMI), more simply defined as an interruption the CPU cannot ignore. AN NMI manifests as a proprietary crash screen. In Windows 7, for example, the crash screen is what techs call the Blue Screen of Death (BSoD)--a bright blue screen with a scary-sounding error message on it.
Windows 8/8.1/10 display a blue screen with a sad face and the words to the effect of Windows has a problem. Restart the machine. A MacOS machine might display a spinning rainbow wheel sometimes called the Spinning Pinwheel of Death (SPoD), or more likely, will simply reboot.
NOTE
The CompTIA A+ objectives refer to the SPoD as the pin wheel of death.
Bad RAM sometimes triggers an NMI, although often the culprit lies with buggy programming or clashing code. The BSoD/ SPoD varies across Windows versions and operating systems, and it would require a much lengthier tome than this one to cover all the variations. Suffice it to say that RAM could be the problem when that delightful blue screen or pinwheel appears.
Finally, intermittent memory errors can come from a variety of sources, including a dying power supply, electrical interference, buggy applications, buggy hardware, and so on. These errors show up as lockups, general protection faults, and page faults, but they never have the same address or happen with the same applications. I always check the power supply first.
Once you discover that you may have a RAM problem, you have a couple of options. First, several companies manufacture hardware RAM-testing devices. Second, you can use the method I use--replace and pray. Open the system case and replace each stick, one at a time, with a known good replacement stick. (You have one of those lying around, don't you?) This method, although potentially time-consuming, certainly works. With PC prices as low as they are now, you could simply replace the whole system for less than the price of a dedicated RAM tester.
Third, you could run a software-based tester on the RAM. Because you have to load a software tester into the memory it's about to scan, there's always a small chance that simply starting the software RAM tester might cause an error. Still, you can find some pretty good free ones out there. Windows 7 and later include the Windows Memory Diagnostic tool, which can automatically scan your computer's RAM when you encounter a problem. If you're using another OS, my favorite tool is the open source Memtest86+ (memtest.org). The Memtest86+ software exhaustively checks your RAM and reports bad RAM when it finds it.
NOTE
A general protection fault (GPF) is an error that can cause an application to crash. Often GPFs are caused by programs stepping on each other's toes. In future topic "Troubleshooting Operating Systems" will go into more detail on GPFs and other Window errors.