Power-On Self Test (POST)
BIOS isn't the only program on system ROM. When the computer is turned on or reset, it initiates a special program, also stored on the system ROM chip, called the power-on self test (POST). The POST program checks out the system every time the computer boots. To perform this check, the POST sends out a command that says to all of the devices, "Check yourselves out!". All of the standard devices in the computer then run their own built-in diagnostic--the POST doesn't specify what they must check. The quality of the diagnostic is up to the people who made that particular device.
Let's consider the POST for a moment. Suppose some device--let's say it's the keyboard controller chip--runs its diagnostic and determines that it is not working properly. What can the POST do about it? Only one thing really: tell the human in front of the PC! So how does the computer tell the human? PCs convey POST information to you in two ways: beep codes--if anything wrong. By using beep codes before and during the video test, the computer could communicate with you. (If a POST error occurs before the video is available, obviously the error must manifest itself as beeps, because nothing can display on the screen.) The meaning of beep code you'd hear varied among different BIOS manufacturers. You could find the beep codes for a specific motherboard in its motherboard manual.
NOTE
CompTIA refers to beep codes as POST code beeps.
Most modern PCs have only two beep codes: one for bad or missing video (one long beep followed by two or three short beeps), and one for bad or missing RAM (a single beep that repeats indefinitely).
CAUTION
You'll find lots of online documentation about beep codes, but it's usually badly outdated.
You'll hear three other beeps sequences on most PCs (although they're not officially beep codes). At the end of a successful POST, the PC produces one or two short beeps, simply to inform you that all is well. Most systems make a rather strange noise when the RAM is missing or very seriously damaged. Unlike traditional beep codes, this code repeats until you shut off the system. Finally, your speaker might make beeps for reasons that aren't POST or boot related. One or the more common is a series of short beeps after the system's been running for a while. That's the CPU alarm telling you the CPU is approaching its high heat limit.
Text Errors
After the video has tested okay, any POST errors display on the screen as text errors. If you get a text error, the problem is usually, but not always, self-explanatory (for example, simply saying "Keyboard failure"). Text erorors are far more useful than beep codes, because you can simply read the screen to determine the bad device.

POST test error messages at the '<=':
"F10 = System Services"
"F11 = BIOS Boot Manager"
"F12 = PXE Boot"
"Keyboard Failure" <=
"One 1.86 GHz Dual-core Processor, Bus Speed:4.80 GT/s, L2/L3 Cache: 512 KB/4 MB"
"System running at 1.86 GHz"
"System Memory Size: 4.0 GB, System Memory Speed: 800 MHz, Voltage: 1.5V"
POST cards
Beep codes, numeric codes, and text error codes, although helpful, can sometimes be misleading. Worse than that, an inoperative device can somtimes disrupt the POST, forcing the machine into an endless loop. This causes the PC to act dead--no beeps and nothing on the screen. In this case, you need a device, called a POST card, to monitor the POST and identify which piece of hardware is causing the trouble.
POST cards are simple cards that snap into expansion slots on your system. A small, two-character light-emitting diode (LED) readout on the card indicates which device the POST is currently testing.
POST cards used to be essential tools for techs, but today I use them only when I have a "dead" PC to determine at which level it's dead. If the POST card shows no reading, I know the problem is before the POST and must be related to the power, the CPU, the RAM, or the motherboard. If the board posts, then I know to look at more issues, such as the drives and so on.
The Boot Process
All PCs need a process to begin their operations. Once your feed power to the PC, the tight interrelation of hardware, firmware, and software enables the PC to start itself, to "pull itself up by the bootstraps" or boot itself.
When you first power on the PC, the power supply circuitry tests for proper voltage and then sends a signal down a special wire called ther power good wire to awaken the CPU. The moment the power good wire wakes it up, every Intel and clone CPU immediately sends a built-in memory address via its address bus. This special address is the same on every Intel and clone CPU, from the oldest 8086 to the most recent microprocessor. This address is the first line of the POST program on the system ROM! That's how the system starts the POST. After the POST has finished, there must be a way for the computer to find the programs on the hard drive to start the operating system. What happens next differs between the old BIOS way and the UEFI way.
In the older BIOS environment, the POST passes control to the last BIOS function: the bootstrap loader. The bootstrap loader is little more than a few dozen lines of BIOS code tacked to the end of the POST program. Its job is to find the operating system. The bootstrap loader reads CMOS information to tell it where to look first for an operating system. Your PC's CMOS setup utility has an option that you configure to tell the bootstrap loader which devices to check for an operating system and in which order--that's the boot sequence.
detail that can be visible in CMOS boot sequence:
- "> Hard Disk Boot Priority [Press Enter]"
- "First Boot Device [CDROM]"
- "Second Boot Device [Hard Disk]"
- "Third Boot Device [CDROM]"

Almost all storage devices--hard disk drives, solid-state drives, CDs, DVDs, and USB thub drives--can be configured to boot an operating system by setting aside a specific location called the boot sector. If the device is bootable, its boot sector contains special programming designed to tell the system where to locate the operating system. Any device with a functional operating system is called a bootable disk or a system disk. If the bootstrap loader locates a good boot sector, it passes control to the operating system and removes itself from memory. If it doesn't, it goes to the next device in the boot sequence you set in the CMOS setup utility. The boot sequence is an important tool for techs because you can set it to load in special bootable devices so you can run utilities to maintain PCs without using the primary operating system.
In UEFI systems, the POST hands control of the boot process to the Boot Manager, which checks the boot configuration, and then loads the operating system boot loader directly. There's no need for scannning for a boot sector or any of that. UEFI firmware stores the boot manager and boot configuration.
detail that can be visible in UEFI Boot Mode with Boot Manager options displayed:
- "Boot Option Priorities"
    - "Boot Option #1: 'UEFI: Sand...'"
    - "Boot Option #2: 'SATA  PM...'"
- "Boot Override"
    - "> SATA  PM: ST9320421ASG"
    - "> SanDisk U3 Titanium 2.18"
    - "> UEFI: SanDiskU3 Titanium 2.18"
- "> Hard Drive BBS Priorities"
- "(Version 2.00.1201. Copyright (C) 2011 American Megatren...)"
NOTE
If you put an old-style BIOS bootable disk in a UEFI system, the system will most likely drop into BIOS compatibility mode and boot just like the old days.
Some BIOS include a feature that enables a PC to use a preboot execution environment (PXE). A PXE enables you to boot a PC without any local storage by retrieving an OS from a server over a network. You'll see more on PXE when we talk about installing Windows in future topic, "Building a PC".