To clear the CMOS, turn off the PC. Then locate one of those tiny little plastic pieces (officially called a shunt) and place it over the two jumper wires for a moment. Next, restart the PC and immediately go into CMOS and restore the settings you need.
Troubleshooting CPUs
Troubleshooting CPU issues falls into two categories: overheating and catastrophic failures, with overheating being far more common than the latter. Once a CPU is installed properly and functioning, it rarely causes problems. The only exception is when you ask a CPU to do too much too quickly. Then you'll get a sluggish PC. The Intel Atom processor in my vintage notebook, for example, does a great job at surfing the Web, working on e-mail, and writing stellar chapters in your favorite textbook. But if you try to play a game more advanced than Half-Life (the original, circa 1998), the machine stutters and complains and refuses to play nice.
The vast majority of problems with CPUs come from faulty installation or environmental issues that cause overheating. Very rarely will you get a catastrophic failure, but we'll look at the signs of that, too.
Symptoms of Overheating
Failure to install a CPU properly results in either nothing--that is, you push the power button and nothing at all happens--or a system lock-up in a short period of time. Because of the nature of ZIF sockets, you're almost guaranteed that the issue isn't the CPU itself, but rather the installation of the heat-sink and fan assembly. Here's a checklist of possible problems that you need to address when faced with a CPU installation problem:
1. Too much thermal paste can impede the flow of heat from the CPU to the heat sink and cause the CPU to heat up rapidly. All modern CPUs have built-in fail-safes that tell them to shut down before getting damaged by heat.
2. Not enough thermal paste or thermal paste spread unevenly can cause the CPU to heat up and consequently shut it self down.
3. Failure to connect the fan power to the motherboard can cause the CPU to heat up and shut itself down.
The fan and heat-sink installation failures can be tricky the first few times you encounter them. You might see the text from the system setup. you might even get into an installation of Windows before the crash happens. The key is that as soon as you put the CPU under load--that is, make it work for a living--it heats up beyond where the faulty heat-sink connection can dissipate the heat and then shuts down.
With a system that's been running fine for a while, environmental factors can cause problems. An air conditioning failure in my office last summer, deep in the heart of very hot Texas, for example, caused machines throughout the office to run poorly. Some even shut down entirely. (At that point it was time to close the doors and send the staff to the beach, but that's another story.) A client called the other day to complain about his computer continuously rebooting and running slowly. When I arrived on the scene, I found a house with seven cats. Opening up his computer case revealed the hairy truth: the CPU fan was so clogged with cat hair that it barely spun at all! A quick cleaning with a computer vacuum and a can of compressed air and he was a happily computing client.
The CPU needs adequate ventilation. The CPU fan is essential, of course, but the inside of the case also needs to get hot air out through one or more exhaust fans and cool air in through the front vent. If the intake vent is clogged or the exhaust fans stop working or are blocked somehow, the inside of the case can heat up and overwhelm the CPU cooling devices. This will result in a system running slowly or spontaneously rebooting.
Catastrophic Failure
You'll know when a catastrophic error occurs. The PC will suddenly get a Blue Screen of Death (BSoD), what's technically called a Windows Stop error. On MacOS, by comparison, you might get a spinning pinwheel that doesn't stop or a kernel panic (i.e., automatic restart). (CompTIA calls the BSoD and pinwheel proprietary crash screens and adds a space in the latter, so pin wheel.)
A Blue Screen of Death might goes like:
"A problem has been detected and windows has been shut down to prevent damage to your computer."
"PAGE_FAULT_IN_NON_PAGED_AREA"
"If this is the first time you've seen this stop error screen, restart your computer. If this screen appears again, follow these steps:"
"Check to make sure that any new hardware or software is properly installed. If this is a new installation, ask your hardware or software manufacturer for any windows update you might need."
"If problems continue, disable or remove any newly installed hardware or software. Disable BIOS memory options such as caching or shadowing. If you need to use Safe Mode to remove or disable components, restart your computer, press F8 to select Advanced Startup Options, and then select Safe Mode."
"Technical Information:"
"*** STOP: 0x00000050 (0x00000000,0xF866C51E, 0x00000008, 0xC0000000)"
"***     cdrom.sys - Address F866C51E base at F866A000, DateStamp 36B027B2"
Or the entire computer will simply stop and go black, perhaps accompanied by a loud pop. The acrid smell of burnt electronics or ozone will grace your nasal passages. You might even see the trails of smoke coming out of the case. You might not know immediately that the CPU has smoked, but follow your nose. Seriously. Sniff the inside of the case until you find the strongest smell. If it's the CPU, that's bad news. Whatever electrical short hit it probably caused damage to the motherboard too, and you're looking at a long day of replacement and rebuilding.
Chapter Review
Questions
1. What do registers provide for the CPU?
A. Registers determine the clock speed.
B. The CPU uses registers for temporary storage of internal commands and data.
C. Registers enable the CPU to address RAM
D. Registers enable the CPU to control the address bus.
2. What function des the external data bus have in PC?
A. The external data bus determines the clock speed for the CPU.
B. The CPU uses the external data bus to address RAM.
C. The external data bus provides a channel for the flow of data and commands between CPU and RAM.
D. The CPU uses the external data bus to access registers.
3. What is the function of the address bus in the PC?
A. The address bus enables the CPU to communicate with the memory controller chip.
B. The address bus enables the memory controller chip to communicate with the RAM.
C. The address bus provides a channel for the flow of data and commands between CPU and RAM.
D. The address bus enables the CPU to access registers.
4. Which of the following terms are measures of CPU speed?
A. Megahertz and gigahertz
B. Megabytes and gigabytes
C. Megahertz and gigabytes
D. Frontside bus, backside bus
5. Which CPU feature enables the microprocessor to support running multiple operating systems at the same time?
A. Clock multiplying
B. Caching
C. Pipelining
D. Virtualization support
6. Into which socket could you place an Intel Core i5?
A. Socket LGA 2011
B. Socket LGA 1151
C. Socket C
D. Socket AM3+
7. Which feature enables a single-core CPU to function like two CPUs?
A. Hyper-Threading
B. SpeedStep
C. Virtualization
D. x64
8. What steps do you need to take to install a Core i3 CPU into an FM2+ motherboard?
A. Lift the ZIF socket arm; place the CPU according to the orientation markings; snap on the heat-sink and fan assembly.
Lift the ZIF socket arm; place the CPU according to the orientation markings; add a dash of thermal paste; snap on the heat-sink and fan assembly.
C. Lift the ZIF socket arm; place the CPU according to the orientation markings; snap on the heat-sink and fan assembly; plug in the fan.
D. Take all of the steps you want to take because it's not going to work.
9. A client calls to complain that his computer starts up, but crashes when Windows starts to load. After a brief set of questions, you find out that his nephew upgraded his RAM for him over the weekend and couldn't get the computer to work right afterward. What could be the problem?
A. Thermal paste degradation
B. Disconnected CPU fan
C. Bad CPU cache
D. There's nothing wrong. It usually takes a couple of days for RAM to acclimate to the new system.
10. Darren has installed a new CPU in a client's computer, but nothing happens when he pushes the power button on the case. The LED on the motherboard is lit up, so he knows the system has power. What could the problem be?
A. He forgot to disconnect the CPU fan.
B. He forgot to apply thermal paste between the CPU and the heat-sink and fan assembly.
C. he used an AMD CPU in an Intel motherboard.
D. He used an Intel CPU in an AMD motherboard.
Answers
1. B. The CPU uses registers for temporary storage of internal commands and data.
2. C. The external data bus provides a channel for the flow of data and commands between the CPU and RAM.
3. A. The address bus enables the CPU to communicate with the memory controller chip.
4. A. The terms megahertz (MHz) and gigahertz (GHz) describes how many million or billion (respectively) cycles per second a CPU can run.
5. D. Intel and AMD CPUs come with virtualization support, enabling more efficient implementation of virtual machines.
6. B. You'll find Core i5 processors in several socket types, notably LGA 1150 and LGA 1151.
7. A. Intel loves its Hyper-Threading, where a single-core CPU can function like a dual-core CPU as long as it has operating system support.
8. D. Intel and AMD processors are not compatible at all.
9. B. Most likely, the nephew disconnected the CPU fan to get at the RAM slots and simply forgot to plug it back in.
10. B. The best answer here is that he forgot the thermal paste, though you can also make an argument for a disconnected fan.